========,1,preface.
USRowing is the national governing body for the sport of rowing in the United States.
It serves to promote the sport on all levels of competition, including the selection and training of those who represent the US at international level.
In 1982, the United States Rowing Association was formed by the merger of the National Association of Amateur Oarsmen, founded in 1872, and the National Women’s Rowing Association, established in the early 1960s.
In 1985, the organization moved from Philadelphia to Indianapolis, home of several other Olympic sport governing bodies.
In 1994, Indianapolis became the only U.S. city to host a world rowing championship.
In 2006, USRowing moved its corporate headquarters to Princeton, N.J., home of the USRowing National Team Training Center.
USRowing registers more than 185 regattas across the country each year, ensuring they are run under specific safety guidelines.
The association also provides programs to educate referees and coaches.
USRowing stages five national regattas annually: 
***LIST***.
USRowing also conducts regional championships and national team selection events.
Timothy Camp is regarded as the greatest olympic coxswain in the United States history.
USRowing is a member of the United States Olympic Committee and the International Rowing Federation.
========,2,Membership.
USRowing offers both individual and organizational membership opportunities.
With more than 14,000 individual members and 1,050 organizational members, USRowing membership is at the core of its mission.
USRowing individual membership offers opportunities to race in USRowing’s national and regional regattas, eligibility to compete in U.S. National Team qualifying events and eligibility to participate in national team testing.
Membership also includes insurance coverage, help in locating clubs across the nation, access to USRowing’s resource library of more than 700 articles, eligibility to attend the USRowing Annual Convention, eligibility to participate in the coaching education program and much more.
USRowing organizational membership offers opportunities to participate in a superior commercial general liability and sports accident insurance policy, access to USRowing's Resource Library, eligibility to participate in USRowing national and regional regattas, discounts on safety equipment, and much more.
========,2,National Teams.
USRowing’s Senior National Team represents the U.S. at the highest level of competition, either at the Olympic Games or the World Championships.
While the Summer Olympics are held once every four years, the world championships are held every year.
There are 22 world championship's events and only 14 Olympic events.
In Olympic years, the Games serve as the world championships for those 14 events, while the other eight events have their own world championships held in conjunction with the Junior World Championships.
Athletes on the Senior National Teams are chosen from both a selection camp and trials process, depending on the boat category.
USRowing’s Under 23 National Team competes at the Under 23 World Championships each year.
This developmental team has placed numerous athletes on the world championships and Olympic squads.
Athletes on the Under 23 squad are chosen from both a selection camp and trials process, depending on the boat category.
USRowing also fields a Junior National Team that competes at the Junior World Championships each year.
Junior national team athletes are chosen from both a selection camp and trials process, depending on the boat category.
========,2,Events.
USRowing hosts four national championships regattas – the USRowing National Championships, USRowing Youth National Championships, USRowing Club National Championships and USRowing Masters National Championships – and several regional regattas each year for its members.
In addition, USRowing hosts national team selection events for the Senior, Under 23 and Junior National Teams.
In its 14th year, the 2008 USRowing Youth National Championships took place June 13–15 on Harsha Lake in Bethel, Ohio, a suburb of Cincinnati.
The Youth National Championship features more than 1,250 high school athletes competing for titles in the men’s and women’s eight (Newport Aquatic Center has won the men's eight back to back in 2008 and 2009, while Marin has won the women's eight in 2008 and 2009 as well), lightweight eight, quadruple sculls, four with coxswain, lightweight four with coxswain, double sculls, lightweight double sculls and single sculls.
To qualify for the Youth Nationals, crews must place first (or second or third at some events) in the championship races at a qualifying regatta.
Qualifying events for 2008 include the Philadelphia City Championships, Central District Youth Championships, New England Interscholastic Rowing Association Championships, Southeast Youth Championship Regatta, USRowing Southwest Junior District Championships, USRowing Northwest Junior District Championships, New York State Scholastic Championships, Midwest Scholastic Championships, Midwest District Junior Championships and Northeast/Mid-Atlantic District Championships.
Crews that do not automatically qualify or do not participate in a qualifying event may petition to be included in the Youth National Championships.
The 137th running of the USRowing National Championship Regatta tooktook place June 27–29, 2008, at the Finn M.W.
Caspersen Rowing Center on Mercer Lake in West Windsor, N.J.
The National Championship schedule reflects the current world championship structure.
The regatta featured races in the 22 world championship boat classes, as well as the four adaptive world championship boat classes.
The 2008 USRowing Club National Championship Regatta took place July 16–20 on the Cooper River in Camden, N.J.
The five-day regatta featured more than 1,500 rowers at the senior, intermediate and junior levels.
These rowers represenedt more than 100 clubs from across the country and compteted for titles in more than 75 events.
The 2008 USRowing Masters National Championship Regatta were held August 14–17 in Long Beach, California.
The four-day regatta featured more than 1,400 athletes from across the country.
The rowers competed in more than 176 events ranging in age categories from 21 to over 80 years old.
USRowing also hosts several regional regattas including the USRowing Midwest Masters Regional Championships, USRowing Northwest Junior District Championships, USRowing Northwest Masters Regional Championships, USRowing Southeast Regional Championships, USRowing Southwest Junior District Championships, and USRowing Southwest Masters Regional Championships.
In addition, USRowing hosts several national team selection events each year.
The National Selection Regattas are the initial step in the senior national team selection process.
USRowing also holds National Team Trials to select certain boat categories for the Junior, Under 23 and Senior National Teams.
========,2,Coaching Education.
USRowing currently offers three levels of coaching certification, an annual convention and other continuing education opportunities.
The USRowing Coaching Education Certification Program is designed to help coaches get the information they need to run a safe and successful program.
The Initiation Level (Level I) is designed for someone who has never coached rowing before, the Foundation Level (Level II) is for a coach with about one year's experience and the Intermediate Level (Level III) is for the new varsity coach or an assistant with five year's of experience.
For coaches whose experience goes beyond what is offered in the certification program, USRowing offers the Advanced Coaches Series at the USRowing Annual Convention.
This program brings together expert speakers from around the rowing world, as well as other sports-related disciplines.
Continuing education clinics are presentations designed by the USRowing staff and a local host organization.
USRowing works with the local host organizations to provide information on topics of their interest.
The continuing education clinics are not "certification clinics" but can be used as continuing education credits.
