========,1,preface.
The King's College London Rugby Football Club (also referred to as KCLRFC and King's Rugby) represents King's College London in rugby union competitions, notably BUCS and the University of London Union's Gutteridge Cup.
King's Rugby Football Club is one of the oldest rugby clubs in the world and traditionally one of the leading London University rugby clubs.
King's College rugby team was part of the King's College Hospital rugby team that was a founding member of the RFU.
========,2,Background.
KCLRFC runs two competitive sides each entered into the BUCS leagues.
The 1st XV compete in the Premiership B South.
The 2nd XV upholds a competitive nature in the fourth tier of the South East region.
A new 3rd XV compete in the 7th tier of the South East region.
Both teams are also entered into the University of London Union cup competitions: the 1st XV compete for the Gutteridge Cup which is open to all University of London 1st XVs (including Imperial College who affiliate to the Union despite the college leaving the federal university in 2007); the 2nd XV compete in the Reserves Plate - open to all 2nd and lower XVs.
The London Varsity is an annual match against their closest rivals UCL played in March, and has recently been played at Allianz Park, the home of Aviva Premiership side Saracens F.C.
It is considered one of the highlights of the University of London's sporting calendar and takes place in front of a crowd of several thousand supporters from both colleges.
The winner takes home the George-Bentham Cup, named after King George IV and Jeremy Bentham, associated with the founding of King’s College and University College respectively.
Head coach John Graves (previously Backs coach for Esher RFC) started coaching at the club from midseason 2007/08 and has since coached the 1st XV team to progress up two leagues, win the Gutteridge Cup and win the varsity match three times.
The club caters for all standards of players, with players new to the game especially welcome.
King's are entering a team for the LUSL league next year; a development league for new players to boost participation in the London area.
At the end of each season an annual general meeting is held where club members vote for a new committee who will be responsible for the club the following season.
========,2,Club colours.
The 1st XV play in red and navy shirts, navy shorts and red and blue socks.
The emblem on the shirts is the university crest and features Reggie the Lion.
Below the crest is the club motto which reads 'Sancte et Sapienter' (With Holiness and Wisdom).
