========,1,preface.
Mark Sayers McGrath (born March 15, 1968) is an American singer of the rock band Sugar Ray.
McGrath is also known for his work as a co-host of "Extra", and he was the host of "Don't Forget the Lyrics!"
in 2010.
McGrath hosted the second season of the TV show "Killer Karaoke", taking the place of Jackass star Steve-O.
========,2,Music career.
McGrath's career started in July 1988, while he was a student at the University of Southern California with a band composed of his high school friends from Newport Beach, CA.
The band was originally called the "Shrinky Dinx" and would later be changed to Sugar Ray.
In 1994 the band signed with Atlantic Records.
Their first success came in 1997 with the song "Fly".
McGrath's personal popularity soared as he appeared on national magazine covers such as "Rolling Stone" and "Spin".
He also made numerous appearances on MTV, VH1, and various talk and awards shows.
"People" magazine named him the "Sexiest Rocker" of 1998.
McGrath contributed the track "Reaching Out" on "Strait Up", a tribute album to late vocalist Lynn Strait, for whom he has a dedication tattoo to memorialize.
He appeared in the video of "Angel's Son," another song written for the album (by Sevendust) and performed with the band during their appearance on "The Tonight Show with Jay Leno".
In 2012, McGrath along with Everclear's Art Alexakis organized the SummerLand Tour, which consisted of Sugar Ray, Everclear, Lit, Marcy Playground and Gin Blossoms.
McGrath and Alexakis decided to split ways in 2013, and McGrath formed the "Under the Sun Tour" with Sugar Ray, Smash Mouth, Gin Blossoms, Vertical Horizon, and Fastball.
Mark confirmed that he would be releasing a new solo EP in the summer of 2015
========,2,Television career.
McGrath began his work as co-host of the "Extra" television show on September 13, 2004 after a producer had noticed his work hosting various VH1 and MTV programs and asked him to join.
McGrath left the show in July 2008 to focus on his music career.
He also served as a guest judge for "American Idol" auditions that were aired in early 2005.
McGrath received the part of Dex Lawson on The WB show "Charmed" in 2005, but he ultimately turned it down due to scheduling conflicts, and he was replaced by Jason Lewis.
McGrath was the host of ' and '.
McGrath is a 3-time Champion of "Rock & Roll Jeopardy!"
on VH1.
In the Finals he won against Dave Mustaine of Megadeth and Gary Dell'Abate of "The Howard Stern Show".
He also performed as himself with Sugar Ray in the 2002 "Scooby-Doo" movie, starring Freddie Prinze, Jr. and Sarah Michelle Gellar.
McGrath began hosting the syndicated version of "Don't Forget the Lyrics" in September 2010.
He appeared on "The Celebrity Apprentice Season 4" which premiered in March 2011, where he was fired in week six and finished in tenth place.
He also performed along with his band Sugar Ray in an episode of Las Vegas, Season 1 Episode 19.
In 2013, he appeared on "Celebrity Wife Swap" and the penultimate episode of "The Office".
McGrath continued his TV appearances in 2014 and 2015 by guest starring on "The Neighbors" and "Workaholics".
McGrath also hosted truTv's "Killer Karaoke" and starring in "".
In 2016, he appeared in the pilot episode of "Lady Dynamite" portraying himself.
========,2,Personal life.
McGrath was born in Hartford, Connecticut.
His family moved from Connecticut to Newport Beach, California when he was eight years old.
He attended Corona Del Mar High School in Newport Beach and later the University of Southern California in Los Angeles.
He married beautician Carin Kingsland on September 24, 2012.
The couple met in 1994 and were engaged on New Year's Eve 2009 after 16 years of on-and-off dating.
McGrath and Kingsland are parents to twins Lydon Edward and Hartley Grace, born on April 29, 2010.
