========,1,preface.
USS "Richard M. Rowell" (DE-403) was a acquired by the United States Navy during World War II.
The primary purpose of the destroyer escort was to escort and protect ships in convoy, in addition to other tasks as assigned, such as patrol or radar picket.
Post-war, she returned home with six battle stars to her credit.
She was named in honor of Ensign Richard M. Rowell (1916–1942) who was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross for downing a Japanese plane on 20 February 1942.
The ship's keel was laid down 18 August 1943 by Brown Shipbuilding Co. at their yard in Houston, Texas; Launched on 17 November 1943, sponsored by Mrs. Agnes M. Rowell, the ship was commissioned on 9 March 1944, Lieutenant Commander Harry A. Barnard, Jr., in command.
========,2,History.
========,3,World War II.
Following shakedown off Bermuda, "Richard M. Rowell" departed Boston, Massachusetts on 6 May 1944 and proceeded via the Panama Canal and San Diego, California to Pearl Harbor, arriving there on 31 May.
In July 1944 she escorted a convoy to Eniwetok and screened escort carriers returning to Pearl Harbor.
In August she protected a transport group on its voyage to Tulagi, Solomons, and screened escort carriers to Manus.
In September she protected an air support task force during the landings on Morotai on 15 September, saving two pilots.
"Richard M. Rowell" rescued survivors from the destroyer escort , which had been hit by a torpedo from the Japanese submarine on 3 October 1944.
Later that day, thinking she was attacking the culprit of the "Shelton" attack, she mistakenly attacked in a submarine safety lane and sank her.
"Richard M. Rowell" next screened a carrier group providing air support for the landings on Leyte, Philippine Islands on 20 October.
On 23 October, "Richard M. Rowell" sank .
She then took part in the Battle off Samar.
On 25 October, "Richard M. Rowell" was a member of the escort of "Taffy One", which was operating off Surigao Island about south of Task Force 3, which was the subject of the main Japanese attack.
"Taffy One" had just launched planes to the south to attack the Japanese retiring from the Battle of Surigao Strait, when she was subjected to a "kamikaze" attack by six Japanese planes from Davao.
Responding to this emergency, "Richard M. Rowell" rescued one survivor from the escort carrier .
"Taffy One" arrived too late to be of much assistance to Taffy Three, which bore the brunt of the Japanese attack; "Richard M. Rowell" did fight off another "kamikaze" attack on 26 October.
Returning to the carrier formation, she donated blood plasma from her own supply, and medical supplies from , to .
On 27 October, "Richard M. Rowell" escorted "Santee" to Manus, and arrived at Pearl Harbor on 19 November.
She joined antiair- and ASW patrols for the landings 9 January 1945 at Lingayen Gulf, Luzon, Philippine Islands.
After protecting underwater demolition drills at Ulithi in late January and early February, she guarded transports to Iwo Jima, and supported air units during the landings there on 19 February.
Departing Ulithi on 21 March, she protected air units during the landings on 1 April upon Okinawa, before returning to Guam on 11 May.
In July she patrolled in Leyte Gulf, Philippine Islands, and escorted the escort carrier to Ulithi, before escorting three transports to San Pedro Bay, Philippine Islands, in August.
Following duty at Leyte Gulf and Okinawa in September, she proceeded via Eniwetok and Pearl Harbor to San Diego, arriving 6 November.
========,3,Post-war decommissioning.
Decommissioned on 2 July 1946, "Richard M. Rowell" remained in the Pacific Reserve Fleet until stricken from the Navy list on 30 June 1968.
In June 1969, she was sold for scrapping.
