========,1,preface.
The Tournoi de Paris, also known as Trophée de Paris, is a pre-season association football invitational competition hosted by French club Paris Saint-Germain at their home ground Parc des Princes, in Paris, France.
The competition was founded in 1957 by former hosts Racing Paris to celebrate their 25th anniversary.
Since the tournament's inception, the winners have received different trophies.
Regarded as French football's most prestigious friendly tournament, the Tournoi de Paris was held annually each summer between 1957 and 1966 by Racing Paris.
It briefly returned in 1973 with new hosts Paris FC.
In 1975, current hosts Paris Saint-Germain successfully relaunched the competition.
After an almost uninterrupted 18-year spell (the 1990 edition was not held), PSG abandoned the tournament in 1993 for financial reasons.
However, PSG revived the Tournoi de Paris in 2010 to commemorate its 40th anniversary.
From 1957 to 1993, four teams (including the hosts) played in a knockout format.
The tournament featured two semi-finals, a third-place play-off, and a final.
Modeled off Arsenal's Emirates Cup, the competition switched to a group-stage format in 2010.
Not held in 2011, it was renamed Trophée de Paris in 2012, and featured a single prestigious match.
This was the tournament's last edition to date.
Brazilian team Vasco da Gama won the inaugural Tournoi de Paris in 1957, while Barcelona won the last edition in 2012.
Paris Saint-Germain is the most successful club in the competition's history, having lifted the trophy on seven occasions.
Belgian outfit Anderlecht is next on the title count with three, while fellow French club Racing Paris and Brazilian sides Santos and Fluminense are the only other teams to have won the competition more than once.
PSG arch-rivals Olympique de Marseille is among a group of clubs to have won the tournament once.
========,2,History.
========,3,From Racing to PSG.
The Tournoi de Paris was founded in 1957 by former hosts Racing Paris to celebrate their 25th anniversary.
The Parisian side invited Spanish club Real Madrid, Brazilian team Vasco da Gama and German outfit Rot-Weiss Essen to the tournament played at the Parc des Princes.
Vasco won the inaugural edition after defeating the Real Madrid of Raymond Kopa, Alfredo Di Stéfano and Francisco Gento in the final (4–3).
From 1957 to 1993, the tournament was played in knockout format.
Four teams (including the hosts) participated in the competition, which featured two semi-finals, a third-place play-off, and a final.
The tournament was held annually each summer between 1957 and 1966 by Racing Paris.
It briefly returned in 1973, with Paris FC as the new hosts.
Following Paris FC's failed attempt to relaunch the competition, current hosts Paris Saint-Germain and club president Daniel Hechter successfully did so in 1975.
Reinforced for the occasion with Dutch legend Johan Cruyff, PSG lost to Spanish side Valencia in the final (0–1) in front of a sold-out Parc des Princes.
The 1978 edition proved to be the most unbalanced of them all.
A few weeks before the 1978 FIFA World Cup, Paris SG invited the national football teams of Netherlands and Iran.
The "Clockwork Orange" won the competition with ease, hammering Club Brugge in the final (7–1).
========,3,First title and last defeat.
The Red-and-Blues finally won their tournament in 1980, when it seemed all hope was lost.
Dominique Bathenay's last-minute equalizer from the penalty spot in a 4–4 thriller versus Standard Liège sent the game to the penalty shoot-out, where PSG clinched its first Tournoi de Paris.
In 1982, PSG fans were looking forward to the debut of star signing Osvaldo Ardiles.
However, his first match with the capital club could not be worse.
Brazilian team Atlético Mineiro inflicted Paris SG's biggest defeat ever in the tournament as the capital club bowed out in the semi-finals (0–3).
Not all debuts have been bad, though.
In 1985, new PSG manager Gérard Houllier was looking to reinforce the team's attack.
He tested Pierre Vermeulen in the first game of the Tournoi de Paris against AS Saint-Étienne.
Vermeulen would sign for the club and become an undisputed starter in PSG's title-winning campaign.
Although misleading, another good start was that of Jules Bocandé.
Touted as PSG's new star, the Senegal striker scored six goals in three matches at the tournament (five in 1986 and one in 1987), including four in the final against Sporting CP in 1986.
Unfortunately, he would never hit those heights in official competitions.
During his two seasons at the French capital, Bocandé only managed to score six goals, as many as in the Tournoi de Paris.
The 1987 edition was PSG's most catastrophic, and was an indication of what would be a difficult season.
For the first time since 1976, the club finished last in the Tournoi de Paris.
The defeat to Dinamo Zagreb (1–3) would be the last conceded by the Parisians in 90 minutes.
Since then, Paris SG have only been beaten on penalties.
========,3,Last title and revival.
From 1975 to 1993, only one edition of the tournament was cancelled.
It was in 1990 due to the poor condition of the pitch.
The Rolling Stones' concert at the Parc des Princes, a few weeks earlier, was to blame.
The Tournoi de Paris returned in 1991 and saw Paris defeat Sporting CP (2–1) in the final.
The game also saw the end of a 17-year collaboration that began in 1974.
It was PSG's last match with historic shirt sponsor RTL.
In 1993, 's solitary goal gave Paris the victory against AJ Auxerre in front of 12,000 spectators.
The capital side had won the trophy for the seventh time since 1975.
It would turn out to be the last Tournoi de Paris until 2010 and PSG's last title to date as the club abandoned the tournament for financial reasons.
After 17 years of absence, PSG revived the Tournoi de Paris in 2010 to commemorate its 40th anniversary.
Ahead of the tournament, PSG unveiled "Allez Paris Saint-Germain", to the tune of "Go West" by Village People, and Germain the Lynx as the club's official anthem and mascot, respectively.
The Parisian side invited Porto, Roma and Girondins de Bordeaux.
Modeled off Arsenal's Emirates Cup, the competition switched to a group-stage format for the 2010 edition.
PSG defeated Porto (1–0) and shared the points with Roma (1–1), while Bordeaux were held by Roma (1–1) and downed Porto (2–1).
Both French clubs finished with four points, but Bordeaux scored more goals and won the Tournoi de Paris on goal difference.
========,3,Name change.
Not held in 2011, Paris SG renamed it Trophée de Paris in 2012.
It featured a single prestigious match against Barcelona.
The Spanish side lifted the trophy, winning on penalties (1–4) after the match ended in a draw (2–2) at the Parc des Princes.
Rafinha and Lionel Messi from the penalty spot gave Barcelona a comfortable lead, before PSG's Zlatan Ibrahimović and Zoumana Camara forced a penalty shoot-out.
This was the tournament's last edition to date.
