========,1,preface.
Steven Vincent Taylor (born 23 January 1986) is an English professional footballer who plays for Ipswich Town.
Predominantly a central defender, he can also play at right back or, on rare occasions, at left back.
He is best known for his longtime association with Newcastle United.
========,2,Club career.
========,3,Early career.
Taylor was born in Greenwich, London to a family from Newcastle upon Tyne and moved back to the North East weeks later.
He was raised in Whitley Bay, North Tyneside and attended Valley Gardens Middle School with future teammate Peter Ramage.
Despite being based in the North-East, Taylor traveled south to the Midlands twice a week, to train on a Wednesday and play for Leicestershire-based junior side Anstey Nomads, until leaving the side at the age of fourteen under strict orders from members of Newcastle's youth staff.
========,3,Newcastle United.
Taylor, then a striker, joined the Newcastle United youth academy after being scouted at Cramlington Juniors, where he played alongside Peter Ramage, and Wallsend Boys Club.
At age thirteen, he was switched to defence.
He played a key part in helping the U-17's win the old Premier Academy League U-17 title for the 2001–02 season.
After finishing his GCSEs at Monkseaton High School, Taylor capped a fine season by joining the academy on a first-year scholarship and signed professional terms when he turned seventeen.
The following season, he was sent on a month-long loan to Wycombe Wanderers where he played under his childhood hero Tony Adams and made his league debut in the old Second Division against Notts County in December 2003.
Upon returning to Newcastle in the latter half of the season, the teenager was mostly shifting back and forth between the first team and reserves.
On 25 March 2004 in the UEFA Cup Fourth Round second leg tie against Mallorca, he came on as a substitute for Andy O'Brien to make his first team debut and held the record as the Magpies' youngest debutant in European competition in the 2000s until it was broken by Andy Carroll in November 2006.
Three days later, he made his Premier League debut against Bolton Wanderers and was in the starting eleven as in a less familiar right back role.
His debut ended disappointingly as he was out-muscled by Henrik Pedersen in the build up that led to Bolton's match-winning goal.
This would be his only other appearance for the rest of the season, although he did make the bench on several occasions.
The start of the 2004–05 season was disappointing, as Taylor had a long injury lay-off.
He eventually came back to play 22 games for the club, starting 17.
During this season, the teenager was largely remembered for a bizarre incident in the 2 April match against Aston Villa where he "saved" Darius Vassell's shot and went down clutching his chest.
The referee promptly dismissed him for "deliberate handball" but it was overshadowed by the heated on-pitch argument between Lee Bowyer and Kieron Dyer which led to their dismissals and Newcastle going down to eight men.
Because his dive was inconsequential (the game was beyond Newcastle as Dyer and Bowyer had been sent off), he achieved cult/comical status with Newcastle fans and many neutrals.
Taylor's first few seasons were marred by various injuries.
He missed the latter half of the 2005–06 season after aggravating a shoulder injury sustained while on international duty.
Following surgery he was effectively ruled out for entire second half of the season but managed to make a substitute appearance in Alan Shearer's testimonial match on 11 May.
The 2006–07 season was considered the breakthrough season for Taylor.
He scored his debut senior goal in a UEFA Cup tie against Celta de Vigo on 23 November 2006.
The two sides were deadlocked at 1–1 before his header won the game.
He earned the nickname "Forrest Gump" for celebrating by running the length of the pitch.
He then scored his first league goal in a 3–1 victory against Blackburn Rovers on 9 December 2006, and began to play more regularly, making 12 starts for Newcastle in defence.
Under Sam Allardyce, Taylor was in and out of the starting eleven and there were fears that he would leave after he had rejected the contract extension offered Nevertheless, in November 2007, he was voted the North East FWA Young Player of the Year for his achievements.
With the installation of Kevin Keegan as Allardyce's successor, he won back his place and signed the contract at the end of the season.
After several months of first-team starts, an injury caused Taylor lose his place to Sébastien Bassong, who formed an impressive partnership with Fabricio Coloccini.
He put some strong performances in vital matches, including scoring a goal and setting up another to earn a hard-fought draw away at Everton, and was back into the team, mostly at right-back due to injury problems.
On 24 May 2009, he notched up his 150th appearance for the club in the ultimate game of the 2008–09 season, a loss against Aston Villa.
Despite his strong performances, his season ended on a low note as Newcastle were relegated after failing to defeat Villa and an injury forced him to miss the U21 European Championships taking place in June.
He came in second in The Journal's player of the season poll, behind Bassong.
With Newcastle relegated, there were question marks over Taylor's future.
Rumours began circulating in newspapers about a possible move back to the Premier League, including a possible replacement for Chelsea captain John Terry who was attracting strong interest from Manchester City and Everton rumoured to be interested as well.
Taylor himself made no move to secure a transfer request and made no comment until the transfer window closed.
In the end, he announced his decision to stay in a bid to help Newcastle regain Premier League status even though it meant that he would have to put his dreams of a senior international debut on hold.
Taylor remained first-choice alongside Coloccini, starting all games when fit.
On 19 September 2009, he scored the first and only goal of the season in a 3–1 win over Plymouth Argyle.
He missed four games in October due to an hamstring injury sustained during training, but was back in the starting eleven for the first game in November against Peterborough United.
On 22 September, he captained the Magpies for the first time in the Carling Cup away loss at Peterborough.
His partnership with Coloccini proved vital as the Magpies embarked on an unbeaten streak at home, until a knee injury sustained against West Brom in January ended their partnership.
Though he missed the rest of the season through injury, Newcastle finished at the top of the table with an unbeaten home record, winning direct promotion back to the Premier League.
His contribution was recognised as he was selected as Sport Newcastle's Sports Personality of the Year.
However, during pre-season for the 2010–11 season, Taylor dislocated his shoulder in a friendly against Carlisle United, ruling him out for up to four months.
In August, it was reported that he was transfer-listed due to unresolved contract issues but no transfer was made.
In an interview after Newcastle's cup tie with Accrington Stanley, manager Chris Hughton said he was still hopeful a contract could be negotiated.
On 28 November, Taylor marked his return by putting in a solid performance in a 1–1 home draw against Chelsea, partnering with Sol Campbell as stand-ins for the suspended Coloccini and Mike Williamson.
Under new manager Alan Pardew, Taylor was a regular part of the team, rekindling his partnership with Coloccini.
At the end of December, he signed an improved contract extension that ties him to Newcastle until 2016.
Taylor's spell in the team was ended on 5 January 2011, having to come off at half time in a 5–0 win over West Ham with a hamstring injury.
The injury ruled him out for six weeks.
With Williamson out injured towards the end of the season, Taylor returned to the starting eleven in May.
Although a succession of injuries limited him to just fourteen appearances, he ended the season on a high by scoring crucial goals in each of the last three matches of the season including the winner against Birmingham City, and a late equaliser against Chelsea to salvage a point.
Taylor ruptured his achilles tendon in a 0–3 defeat to Chelsea on 3 December 2011.
Initially ruled out for nine months, he made a recovery in seven.
Taylor credited his surgeon and Newcastle's physiotherapy team for his early return to football.
He scored on his 27 July 2012 return, helping Newcastle to a 1–1 draw against Olympiakos in the Trofeo Guadiana.
The next day, he was an unused substitute as Newcastle defeated Braga 2–1 to win the competition.
To help welcome Newcastle's influx of signings from Ligue 1, Taylor began working on his French from the end of 2012.
Taylor was sent off on the opening weekend of the 2013–14 Premier League season away to Manchester City for swinging an arm at Sergio Agüero in the first half of a 4–0 defeat.
Taylor suffered a head injury colliding with the post in his side's 1–0 defeat at home to rivals Sunderland.
Taylor scored the first goal in a 3–3 draw with Burnley on 1 January 2015.
On 3 June 2016, Taylor was released by the club.
========,3,Portland Timbers.
On 1 August 2016, Taylor signed for Major League Soccer club Portland Timbers.
On 6 August, Taylor turned out for their reserve side against LA Galaxy II, but scored an own goal and substituted at half-time, in what would be an eventual 4–3 win for T2.
Taylor was made captain in his second appearance for T2, opening the scoring against Orange County Blues; heading in from a Blake Bodily cross.
On 21 August, Taylor made his debut proper for the Timbers in a 3–1 loss to Seattle Sounders.
========,3,Ipswich Town.
The Timbers and Taylor mutually agreed to part ways on 15 December 2016.
He subsequently signed for Ipswich Town on the 25 January 2017 after a brief trial as cover for injured Adam Webster.
Due to being registered to play in the MLS he would not be available to play for the next two games.
During his second game for Ipswich he was injured in a 1-0 win away at Aston Villa with a serious hamstring injury leaving him out for four weeks.
========,2,International career.
In November 2001, Taylor captained the England Under-16 team at the Walkers International Tournament and was voted the player of the tournament.
The following summer, he captained the U-17's to win the Nationwide Tournament, his first international title.
In March 2003, the England Under-17 team qualified for the European Championships, and in the match against Slovakia, Taylor scored his first two goals for England.
He also played in 2003 FIFA World Youth Championship along with future under-21 teammates James Milner, Andrew Taylor and Martin Cranie and started in all the group matches despite being one of the youngest squad members at age seventeen.
Following a good showing in Dubai despite England's dismal results, Taylor made his England under-21 debut on 17 February the next year in a 3–2 win over the Netherlands.
In June 2005, Taylor represented England Under-20 at the Toulon International Tournament, where England finished in third place.
On 6 September 2005, he scored his first under-21 goal, against the German side.
He also scored two goals against the Poland Under-21s in October 2005.
During the 2007 U-21 European Championship qualifying, Taylor began to establish himself as a regular and played a key role in their run to the semifinals at the tournament.
He missed the first match through suspension due to his red card in the play-offs against Germany but played the other two group games and the semi-final where he was unable to stop the late equaliser after going down injured.
With England down to ten men after fellow defender Nedum Onuoha left the field injured and all three substitutions had been used, Taylor was forced to play through the pain barrier as the game went into extra-time and converted his penalty in a dramatic penalty shoot-out that ended 13–12 to the Dutch.
Taylor was called up to the senior team on 17 August 2007 for the friendly against Germany though he did not play in the match and also made an appearance for the B team.
He was appointed captain of the under-21 side on 5 September, having previously been vice-captain to Nigel Reo-Coker, and captained them to a place 2009 European Championships, playing in all qualifiers.
During the second leg of the play-offs against Wales, his header from Jamie O'Hara's corner caused a Sam Vokes own-goal which levelled the score to send England through to the tournament.
He was due to lead them through the European Championships but a recurring injury forced him to withdraw, ending his under-21 career and Mark Noble captained the team in his absence.
On 19 March 2013, Taylor was once again called up to the England national football team senior squad for the World Cup qualifying match against San Marino, as a replacement for the injured Gary Cahill.
