========,1,preface.
"The Bonnie Blue Flag", also known as "We Are a Band of Brothers", is an 1861 marching song associated with the Confederate States.
The words were written by the Ulster-Scots entertainer Harry McCarthy, with the melody taken from the song The Irish Jaunting Car".
The song's title refers to the unofficial first flag of the Confederacy, the Bonnie Blue Flag.
The song was premiered by lyricist Harry McCarthy during a concert in Jackson, Mississippi, in the spring of 1861 and performed again in September of that same year at the New Orleans Academy of Music for the First Texas Volunteer Infantry regiment mustering in celebration.
The New Orleans music publishing house of A.E.
Blackmar issued six editions of "The Bonnie Blue Flag" between 1861 and 1864 along with three additional arrangements.
The "band of brothers" mentioned in the first line of the song recalls the well known St. Crispin's Day Speech in William Shakespeare's play "Henry V" (Act IV, scene ii).
========,2,Lyrical variations.
The first verse of the song goes:
Although the second line is sometimes given as "fighting for our liberty with treasure, blood, and toil", University of San Diego professor Steve Schoenherr and the library of Duke University record the "property" version.
According to Schoenherr, the song sheet was first published in 1861 by A. E. Blackmar and Brother in New Orleans.
When Major General Benjamin Butler captured New Orleans, he allegedly arrested Blackmar, fined Blackmar $500, destroyed all copies of the music, and ordered that anyone caught whistling or singing "The Bonnie Blue Flag" would be fined $25 (roughly $500 in the 1860s).
Eleven other editions of the song were published with different lyrics.
Annie Chambers Ketchum, a Confederate widow who risked her liberty to publish new verses to be sung, published a new version of the song under the title "The Gathering Song."
The following verses were published in a eulogy by Gilberta S. Whittle in the 1904 "Richmond Times Dispatch":
"Come, brothers, rally for the right!
Sends forth his ringing battle-cray She leads the way in honor's path:
Come, rally round the Bonnie Blue Flag Hurrah!
for Southern rights Hurrah for the Bonnie Blue Flag That bears a single star!
We've borne the Yankee trickery,
Till Northern insolence and pride
But ready now with shot and steel
We holst aloft the Bonnie Blue Flag
Now Georgia marches to the front,
Her sisters of the Mexique sea,
Till answering back from hill and glen
A nation holsts the Bonnie Blue Flag
By every stone in Charleston Bay,
We swear to rest not night nor day,
Till bathed in valor's holy blood
Shall greet with shouts the Bonnie Blue Flag
========,2,Complete lyrics.
We are a band of brothers and native to the soil Chorus:
As long as the Union was faithful to her trust Chorus 3.
First gallant South Carolina nobly made the stand Chorus 4.
Ye men of valor gather round the banner of the right Chorus 5.
Now here's to brave Virginia, the Old Dominion State, (Alternately:
Now here's to brave Virginia, the Old Dominion State, Chorus 6.
Then cheer, boys, cheer, raise a joyous shout Chorus 7.
Then here's to our Confederacy, strong we are and brave, Chorus
========,2,Historical inaccuracies.
The third verse of the song misstates the order in which the states seceded from the Union.
The dates on which the states seceded are as follows:
South Carolina (December 20, 1860),
Mississippi (January 9, 1861),
Florida (January 10, 1861),
Alabama (January 11, 1861),
Georgia (January 19, 1861),
Louisiana (January 26, 1861),
Texas (February 1, 1861),
Virginia (April 17, 1861),
Arkansas (May 6, 1861),
North Carolina (May 20, 1861), and
Tennessee (June 8, 1861).
Thus, Alabama did not take South Carolina by the hand, but delayed its secession until the departure of Mississippi and Florida.
The most likely reason for the discrepancy is literary license and a desire to fit within a certain poetic meter.
========,2,Union versions.
As with many songs from the time of the American Civil War, this song had multiple versions for both the Union and Confederate sides.
One Union version, written by J.L.
Geddes, in 1863, a British-born colonel who immigrated to the U.S., was called "The Bonnie Flag With the Stripes and Stars".
Singing of Unionism and equality, it went:
Chorus: Hurrah, Hurrah, Chorus Chorus Chorus Another version went.
Chorus Additionally, the Song of the Irish Volunteers, an anthem of the famous 69th New York regiment known as the Irish Brigade, was sung to the same tune.
