========,1,preface.
Einiosaurus is a medium-sized herbivorous centrosaurine ceratopsian dinosaur from the Upper Cretaceous (Campanian stage) of northwestern Montana.
The name means 'buffalo lizard', in a combination of Blackfeet Indian "eini" and Latinized Ancient Greek "sauros"; the specific name ("procurvicornis") means 'with a forward-curving horn' in Latin.
========,2,Description.
"Einiosaurus" was a herbivorous dinosaur.
In 2010 Gregory S. Paul estimated its body length at 4.5 metres, its weight at 1.3 tonnes.
Its snout is narrow and very pointed.
It is typically portrayed with a low, strongly forward and downward curving nasal horn that resembles a bottle opener, though this may only occur in some adults.
The supraorbital (over-the-eye) horns are low, short and triangular in top view if present at all, as opposed to the chasmosaurines, such as "Triceratops", which have prominent supraorbital horns.
A pair of large spikes, the third epiparietals, projects backwards from the relatively small frill.
Smaller osteoderms adorn the frill edge.
The first epiparietals are largely absent.
========,2,Paleobiology.
Low-diversity and single-species bonebeds are thought to represent herds that may have died in catastrophic events, such as during a drought or flood.
This is evidence that "Einiosaurus", as well as other centrosaurine ceratopsians such as "Pachyrhinosaurus" and "Centrosaurus", were herding animals similar in behavior to modern-day bison or wildebeest.
In contrast, ceratopsine ceratopsids, such as "Triceratops" and "Torosaurus", are typically found singly, implying that they may have been somewhat solitary in life, though fossilized footprints may provide evidence to the contrary.
In 2010, a study by Julie Reizner of the individuals excavated at the Dino Ridge site concluded that "Einiosaurus" grew quickly until its third to fifth year of life after which growth slowed, probably at the onset of sexual maturity.
Like all ceratopsids, "Einiosaurus" had a complex dental battery capable of processing even the toughest plants.
"Einiosaurus" lived in an inland habitat.
"Einiosaurus" fossils are found in the upper part of the Two Medicine Formation of Montana, dating to the mid-late Campanian stage of the late Cretaceous Period, about 74.5 million years ago.
Dinosaurs that lived alongside "Einiosaurus" include the basal ornithopod "Orodromeus", hadrosaurids (such as "Hypacrosaurus", "Maiasaura", and "Prosaurolophus"), the ankylosaurs "Edmontonia" and "Euoplocephalus", the tyrannosaurid "Daspletosaurus" (which appears to have been a specialist of preying on ceratopsians), as well as the smaller theropods "Bambiraptor", "Chirostenotes", "Troodon", and "Avisaurus".
"Einiosaurus" lived in a climate that was seasonal, warm, and semi-arid.
Other fossils found with the "Einiosaurus" material include freshwater bivalves and gastropods, which imply that these bones were deposited in a shallow lake environment.
========,2,History of discovery.
"Einiosaurus" is an exclusively Montanan dinosaur, and all its known remains are currently held at the Museum of the Rockies in Bozeman, Montana.
At least fifteen individuals of varying ages are represented by three adult skulls and hundreds of other bones from two low-diversity (one species) bonebeds, which were discovered by Jack Horner in 1985 and excavated from 1985-1989 by Museum of the Rockies field crews.
These bonebeds were originally thought to contain a new species of "Styracosaurus" and are referred to as such in the comprehensive taphonomic study by Ray Rogers from 1990.
The same year Stephen Czerkas published the name "Styracosaurus makeli", honouring Robert Makela, but without description so that it remained an invalid "nomen nudum".
In 1992 Horner discerned three species in the material from the bonebeds in this region, that he indicated as Type A, B and C. In 1995 Scott D. Sampson formally described and named Type B as the type species "Einiosaurus procurvicornis"; in the same article he named Type C as "Achelousaurus horneri".
The holotype of "Einiosaurus" is MOR 456.
In 2010 Paul renamed "E. procurvicornis" into "Centrosaurus procurvicornis", but this has found no acceptance.
========,2,Classification.
The placement of "Einiosaurus" within Centrosaurinae is problematic due to the transitional nature of several of its skull characters, and its closest relatives are either "Centrosaurus" and "Styracosaurus" or "Achelousaurus" and "Pachyrhinosaurus".
The latter hypothesis is supported by Horner and colleagues, where "Einiosaurus" is the earliest of an evolutionary series in which the nasal horns gradually change to rough bosses, as in "Achelousaurus" and "Pachyrhinosaurus" which are the second and third in this series.
The frills also grow in complexity.
Regardless of which hypothesis is correct, "Einiosaurus" appears to occupy an intermediate position with respect to the evolution of the centrosaurines.
The cladogram presented here follows a 2012 phylogenetic analysis by Ryan "et al."
