========,1,preface.
Susanna Thompson (born January 27, 1958) is an American television, stage and film actress.
She is known for her roles in films "Little Giants" (1994), "Ghosts of Mississippi" (1996), "Random Hearts" (1999) and "Dragonfly" (2002), and as Karen Sammler on ABC drama series "Once and Again" (1999–2002).
From 2012 to 2014, Thompson starred as Moira Queen as a regular cast member in the CW series "Arrow".
========,2,Career.
Thompson received a Dramatic Award for her role as Luisa in "A Shayna Maidel".
She was also nominated for Best Actress by the San Diego Critics Circle for her role in "Agnes of God".
She may be best known for her television work, which includes playing Karen Sammler on "Once and Again", Michelle Generoo in an episode of "The X-Files" and a recurring role as the Borg Queen in the "" two-part episodes "Dark Frontier" (1999) and "Unimatrix Zero" (2000).
Thompson also portrayed Denise Hydecker in the 1998 made-for-TV movie "The Lake".
One of Thompson's most controversial television appearances was on an episode of ' entitled "Rejoined".
In the episode, she participated in one of US television's first same-sex kisses.
The episode first aired on October 30, 1995.
She made a guest appearance on ' on October 7, 2003 in the season five episode "Mother", playing Dr. Greta Heints, a psychiatrist who rehabilitates sex offenders in order to prepare them for a return to society.
She is attacked and knocked unconscious in the early scenes of the episode, and in the course of the investigation, Detectives Olivia Benson (Mariska Hargitay) and Elliot Stabler (Christopher Meloni) discover Heints has been accused of having a romantic relationship with one of her patients.
Beginning in January 2006, she had a starring role in the short-lived NBC drama "The Book of Daniel".
In November 2006, she made her first appearance as Army Lieutenant Colonel Hollis Mann on the CBS series "NCIS", in the recurring role of Special Agent Leroy Jethro Gibbs' (Mark Harmon) love interest.
That same week, she appeared on "Without a Trace".
Thompson starred on the NBC series "Kings", which was based on the biblical story of David.
She played Queen Rose Benjamin, an analogue of Ahinoam, the wife of Saul.
The show premiered in March 2009 and ended.
She also played Carolyn Preston (Lucy's mother) on Timeless which ran for 16 episodes in 2016-present.
========,2,Personal life.
Thompson earned her bachelor's degree in drama from San Diego State University.
Her husband, Martin Katz, is a professor at San Diego State University.
