========,1,preface.
Tteokguk () or sliced rice cake soup is a traditional Korean dish eaten during the celebration of the Korean New Year.
The dish consists of the broth/soup ("guk") with thinly sliced rice cakes ("tteok - it can be called a kind of rice pasta").
It is tradition to eat "tteokguk" on New Year's Day because it is believed to grant the consumer good luck for the year and gain a year of age.
It is usually garnished with thin julienned cooked eggs, marinated meat, and "gim".
========,2,History.
The origin of eating "tteokguk" on New Year's Day is unknown.
However, "tteokguk" is mentioned in the 19th century book of customs "Dongguksesigi" (동국세시기, 東國歲時記) as being made with beef or pheasant used as the main ingredient for the broth, and pepper added as seasoning.
The book also mentions the custom of having a bowl of "tteokguk" in the morning of New Year's Day to get a year older, and the custom of saying "How many bowls of "tteokguk" have you eaten?"
to ask a person's age.
In the book "The Customs of Joseon" written in 1946 by historian Choe Nam-seon, the New Year custom of eating "tteokguk" is speculated as being originated from ancient times.
The white "tteok" signifying purity and cleanliness would be eaten as a ritual to start off the New Year for good fortune.
In Korea, on Lunar New Year's Day, a family performs ancestral rites by serving tteokguk to their ancestors during a joint meal.
Although "tteokguk" is traditionally a seasonal dish, it is now eaten at all times of the year.
========,2,Ingredients and varieties.
The broth is generally made by simmering the main protein (beef, chicken, pork, pheasant, seafood) in a "ganjang" seasoned stock.
The stock is then strained to clarify the broth and long cylinder-shaped "garaetteok" are thin-sliced diagonally and boiled in the clear broth.
Garnish is added before serving; the garnish may vary by region and personal taste, but usual staples are pan-fried julienned egg yolks and whites, "gim" and spring onions.A drizzle of sesame oil is common just prior to serving the teokguk.
Varieties of "tteokguk" include: "saeng tteokguk" (생떡국) or "nal tteokguk" (날떡국), a specialty of Chungcheong province, where a mixture of non-glutinous rice with glutinous rice is made into small balls or rolled into a "garaetteok" shape and then sliced into a boiling broth; "joraengi tteokguk" (조랭이 떡국) from the Kaesong region with the "tteok" twisted in small cocoon shapes; and "gon tteokguk" (곤떡국) from the island of Jeju, which uses sliced "jeolpyeon tteok" rather than the usual "garaetteok".
Another variety, "tteokmanduguk" is literally "tteokguk" with additional "mandu".
