========,1,preface.
Neue Deutsche Biographie (NDB; literally "New German Biography") is a biographical reference work.
Scheduled for completion in 2019, it is the successor to the "Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie" (ADB, Universal German Biography).
The 25 volumes published thus far cover more than 21,800 individuals and families who lived in the German language area.
NDB is published in German by the Historical Commission at the Bavarian Academy of Sciences and Humanities and printed by Duncker & Humblot in Berlin.
The index and full-text articles are freely available online via the website German Biography (Deutsche Biographie) and the Biographical Portal.
========,2,Scope.
NDB is a comprehensive reference work, similar to "Dictionary of National Biography", "Dictionary of American Biography", "American National Biography", "Dictionary of Canadian Biography", "Dictionary of Australian Biography", "Dictionary of New Zealand Biography", "Dictionary of Irish Biography", "Svenskt biografiskt lexikon" and "Österreichisches Biographisches Lexikon 1815-1950" (ÖBL) (Austrian Biographical Dictionary 1815-1950).
Its first volume, alphabetically covering names from "Aachen" to "Behaim", was published in 1953.
As of 2015, the most recent volume is the 25th, covering names from "Stadion" to "Tecklenborg", which was published in February 2013.
So far, more than 21,800 biographies of individuals and families, who lived in the German language Sprachraum, have been published.
Some 2,400 further articles will be added in three further volumes, with completion expected in 2019.
An NDB article usually contains genealogical information such as date and place of birth, date and place of death, tomb, parents, grandparents, marriages, divorces, number of children, alternate and birth names, academic degrees, a curriculum vitae in whole sentences, a valuation of the subject's political, economic, social, scientific, technical or artistic achievements, a bibliography and references to portraits.
Only deceased persons with a close relation to the German language area are recorded.
Each article is signed by its author.
========,2,Access.
An index cataloguing all articles and the full text of articles in the first 24 volumes, covering names from "Aachen" to "Stader", is freely available online.
The index is also part of the Biographie-Portal (Biographical Portal).
This cooperative project of the Bavarian State Library (Bayerische Staatsbibliothek), the Historical Commission at the Bavarian Academy of Sciences and Humanities (Historische Kommission bei der Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften), the Austrian Academy of Sciences and Humanities (Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften) and the Foundation Historical Dictionary of Switzerland also makes available data of "Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie" (ADB), "Österreichisches Biographisches Lexikon 1815-1950" (ÖBL) (Austrian Biographical Dictionary 1815-1950), "Historisches Lexikon der Schweiz / Dictionnaire Historique de la Suisse / Dizionario Storico della Svizzera" (HLS / DHS / DSS), Rheinland-Pfälzische Personendatenbank (RPPB) and Sächsische Biografie (Saxon Biography).
