========,1,preface.
, born in the Nishi-Azabu district of Minato, was a Japanese record producer, DJ, composer and arranger who recorded under the stage name .
Nujabes (pronounced ) was an anagram of his name, being the reverse spelling of Seba Jun.
He was the owner of two Shibuya record stores, T Records and Guinness Records, and founder of the independent label Hydeout Productions.
His style mixes hip hop and jazz samples.
Nujabes collaborated with other Japanese artists such as Uyama Hiroto, Shing02 (with whom he created the critically acclaimed "Luv(sic)" hexalogy), and Minmi, and was also involved with America's underground hip hop scene through collaboration with CYNE, Apani B, Five Deez, Substantial, CL Smooth, Fat Jon, and Terry Callier.
In his career, he released three studio albums ("Metaphorical Music" in 2003, "Modal Soul" in 2005, and "Spiritual State", released posthumously in 2011) and two collection compilations ("Hydeout Productions 1st Collection" in 2003 and "2nd Collection" in 2007).
One of his most recognizable works is that of the background music for Shinichirō Watanabe's series "Samurai Champloo" (' and ') in 2004.
On February 26, 2010, Jun Seba died in a traffic collision.
Following his death, numerous tributes were made by other artists from around the world (including his own label Hydeout Productions).
========,2,Career.
Nujabes was best known for his approach to hip hop beats, often blending jazz influences into his songs creating a mellow, nostalgic and atmospheric sound.
In addition to Japanese artists like Uyama Hiroto, Shing02, L-Universe, and Minmi, Nujabes collaborated with various underground American hip hop acts such as CYNE, Cise Starr (as a solo apart from the hip-hop collective CYNE), Apani B, Five Deez, Substantial, CL Smooth, Fat Jon, Terry Callier as well as British rapper Funky DL.
He was also a member of the production duo Urbanforest, an experimental collaboration with Nao T.
Nujabes was one of the most prolific contributors to the background music and soundtracks of "Samurai Champloo", an anime which blends a feudal Japan setting with modern anachronisms, especially in regard to hip hop culture such as graffiti and rapping.
Nujabes collaborated with Shing02 on the critically acclaimed "Luv(sic)" hexalogy.
They made parts 1-3 together, but after Seba's death many doubted that the series could ever be completed.
However, parts 4 and 5 had already been completed, and were released shortly after Nujabes' death.
Although part 6 was not among the previously completed tracks, it was released on February 26, 2013, 3 years after the day Seba had died.
According to Shing02's official Facebook page, the instrumental to what would eventually be part 6 was discovered on Nujabes' cell phone a few weeks after his death.
========,2,Death.
On February 26, 2010, Nujabes was involved in a traffic accident upon exiting the Shuto Expressway at 10:14 PM.
He was pronounced dead at a hospital in Shibuya Ward after efforts to revive him failed.
========,2,Legacy.
Nujabes' death has elicited many tributes from other artists around the world.
On Bandcamp, the New York based Digi Crates records have released a series of tribute albums performed by various artists in a style reminiscent of Seba's.
In addition, Nujabes' former label Hydeout Productions released a tribute album titled "Modal Soul Classics II" featuring a number of former collaborators and with lyrics and song titles referencing select tracks from both "Modal Soul" and "Metaphorical Music", such as the track "Music is Ours", which directly references "Music is Mine", the 5th track of "Modal Soul".
Frequent collaborator Shing02 has performed at many tribute concerts to the late DJ, and has remarked that "Through his soulful music, Nujabes has touched so many people around the world, even beyond his dreams", and "[I] deeply regret the loss of a unique talent and a close friend."
In 2013 Australian producer Ta-ku released the Tribute "25 Nights for Nujabes".
Daniel Hodgman, founder of hip hop culture website BonusCut, in a 2014 highlight of Nujabes' Modal Soul has claimed that, "Nujabes may not be physically with us anymore, but through his music, his legacy and lust for life lives on".
Co-founder Gus Navarro remarked that, "The music of the late producer Nujabes is something to hold onto and never let go."
