========,1,preface.
========,2,Context.
Much of Jeffers' poetry was written in narrative and epic form, but he is also known for his shorter verse and is considered an icon of the environmental movement.
Influential and highly regarded in some circles, despite or because of his philosophy of "inhumanism", Jeffers believed that transcending conflict required human concerns to be de-emphasized in favor of the boundless whole.
This led him to oppose U.S. participation in World War II, a stand that was controversial after the U.S. entered the war.
========,2,Life.
Jeffers was born in Allegheny, Pennsylvania (now part of Pittsburgh), the son of a Presbyterian minister and scholar of ancient languages and Biblical history, Reverend Dr. William Hamilton Jeffers, and Annie Robinson Tuttle.
His brother was Hamilton Jeffers, a well-known astronomer who worked at Lick Observatory.
Jeffers traveled through Europe during his youth and attended school in Germany, France, and Switzerland.
An outstanding student, he was instructed in the classics and Greek and Latin language and literature.
By age twelve, he was fluent in German and French as well as English.
He earned his bachelor's degree from Occidental College at age 18.
While attending college he was an avid outdoorsman and active in the school's literary societies.
After he graduated from Occidental, Jeffers went to the University of Southern California (USC) to study at first literature, and then medicine.
He met Una Call Kuster in 1906; she was three years older than he was, a graduate student, and the wife of a Los Angeles attorney.
Jeffers and Mrs. Kuster became lovers.
Mr. Kuster discovered their affair in 1910.
Jeffers dropped out of USC medical school and enrolled as a forestry student at the University of Washington in Seattle, a course of study that he abandoned after a semester, at which time he returned to Los Angeles.
By 1912 the affair became a scandal, reaching the front page of the "Los Angeles Times".
Una spent some time in Europe to quiet things down, then the lovers lived together by Lake Washington to await the completion of Una's divorce.
The two were married in 1913, then moved to La Jolla, California, and finally Carmel, California, where Jeffers constructed Tor House and Hawk Tower.
The couple had a daughter who died a day after birth in 1913, and then twin sons (Donnan and Garth) in 1916.
Una died of cancer in 1950.
Jeffers died in 1962; an obituary can be found in the "New York Times", January 22, 1962.
========,2,Poetic career.
In the 1920s and 1930s, at the height of his popularity, Jeffers was famous for being a tough outdoorsman, living in relative solitude and writing of the difficulty and beauty of the wild.
He spent most of his life in Carmel, California, in a granite house that he had built himself called "Tor House and Hawk Tower".
"Tor" is a term for a craggy outcrop or lookout.
Before Jeffers and Una purchased the land where Tor House would be built, they rented two cottages in Carmel, and enjoyed many afternoon walks and picnics at the "tors" near the site that would become Tor House.
To build the first part of Tor House, a small, two story cottage, Jeffers hired a local builder, Michael Murphy.
He worked with Murphy, and in this short, informal apprenticeship, he learned the art of stonemasonry.
He continued adding on to Tor House throughout his life, writing in the mornings and working on the house in the afternoon.
Many of his poems reflect the influence of stone and building on his life.
He later built a large four-story stone tower on the site called Hawk Tower.
While he had not visited Ireland at this point in his life, it is possible that Hawk Tower is based on Francis Joseph Bigger's 'Castle Séan' at Ardglass, County Down, which had also in turn influenced Yeats' choice of a poets tower, Thoor Ballylee.
Construction on Tor House continued into the late 1950s and early 1960s, and was completed by his eldest son.
The completed residence was used as a family home until his descendants decided to turn it over to the Tor House Foundation, formed by Ansel Adams, for historic preservation.
The romantic Gothic tower was named after a hawk that appeared while Jeffers was working on the structure, and which disappeared the day it was completed.
The tower was a gift for his wife Una, who had a fascination for Irish literature and stone towers.
In Una's special room on the second floor were kept many of her favorite items, photographs of Jeffers taken by the artist Weston, plants and dried flowers from Shelley's grave, and a rosewood melodeon which she loved to play.
The tower also included a secret interior staircase – a source of great fun for his young sons.
During this time, Jeffers published volumes of long narrative blank verse that shook up the national literary scene.
These poems, including "Tamar" and "Roan Stallion", introduced Jeffers as a master of the epic form, reminiscent of ancient Greek poets.
These poems were full of controversial subject matter such as incest, murder and parricide.
Jeffers' short verse includes "Hurt Hawks," "The Purse-Seine" and "Shine, Perishing Republic."
His intense relationship with the physical world is described in often brutal and apocalyptic verse, and demonstrates a preference for the natural world over what he sees as the negative influence of civilization.
Jeffers did not accept the idea that meter is a fundamental part of poetry, and, like Marianne Moore, claimed his verse was not composed in meter, but "rolling stresses."
He believed meter was imposed on poetry by man and not a fundamental part of its nature.
Initially, "Tamar and Other Poems" received no acclaim, but when East Coast reviewers discovered the work and began to compare Jeffers to Greek tragedians, Boni & Liveright reissued an expanded edition as "Roan Stallion, Tamar and Other Poems" (1925).
In these works, Jeffers began to articulate themes that contributed to what he later identified as Inhumanism.
Mankind was too self-centered, he complained, and too indifferent to the "astonishing beauty of things."
Jeffers's longest and most ambitious narrative, "The Women at Point Sur" (1927), startled many of his readers, heavily loaded as it was with Nietzschean philosophy.
The balance of the 1920s and the early 1930s were especially productive for Jeffers, and his reputation was secure.
In 1934, he made the acquaintance of the philosopher J Krishnamurti and was struck by the force of Krishnamurti's person.
He wrote a poem entitled "Credo" which many feel refers to Krishnamurti.
In "Cawdor and Other Poems" (1928), "Dear Judas and Other Poems" (1929), "Descent to the Dead", "Poems Written in Ireland and Great Britain" (1931), "Thurso's Landing" (1932), and "Give Your Heart to the Hawks" (1933), Jeffers continued to explore the questions of how human beings could find their proper relationship (free of human egocentrism) with the divinity of the beauty of things.
These poems, set in the Big Sur region (except Dear Judas and Descent to the Dead), enabled Jeffers to pursue his belief that the natural splendor of the area demanded tragedy: the greater the beauty, the greater the demand.
As Euripides had, Jeffers began to focus more on his own characters' psychologies and on social realities than on the mythic.
The human dilemmas of "Phaedra", "Hippolytus", and "Medea" fascinated him.
Many books followed Jeffers' initial success with the epic form, including an adaptation of Euripides' "Medea", which became a hit Broadway play starring Dame Judith Anderson.
D. H. Lawrence, Edgar Lee Masters, Benjamin De Casseres, and George Sterling were close friends of Jeffers, Sterling having the longest and most intimate relationship with him.
While living in Carmel, Jeffers became the focal point for a small but devoted group of admirers.
At the peak of his fame, he was one of the few poets to be featured on the cover of "Time Magazine".
He was also asked to read at the Library of Congress, and was posthumously put on a U.S. postage stamp.
Part of the decline of Jeffers' popularity was due to his staunch opposition to the United States' entering World War II.
In fact, his book "The Double Axe and Other Poems" (1948), a volume of poems that was largely critical of U.S. policy, came with an extremely unconventional note from Random House that the views expressed by Jeffers were not those of the publishing company.
Soon after, his work was received negatively by several influential literary critics.
Several particularly scathing pieces were penned by Yvor Winters, as well as by Kenneth Rexroth, who had been very positive in his earlier commentary on Jeffers' work.
Jeffers would publish poetry intermittently during the 1950s but his poetry never again attained the same degree of popularity that it had in the 1920s and the 1930s.
========,3,Inhumanism.
Jeffers coined the word "inhumanism", the belief that mankind is too self-centered and too indifferent to the "astonishing beauty of things."
In the famous poem "Carmel Point," Jeffers called on humans to "uncenter" themselves.
In "The Double Axe," Jeffers explicitly described inhumanism as "a shifting of emphasis and significance from man to notman; the rejection of human solipsism and recognition of the trans-human magnificence.
This manner of thought and feeling is neither misanthropic nor pessimist.
It offers a reasonable detachment as rule of conduct, instead of love, hate and envy ... it provides magnificence for the religious instinct, and satisfies our need to admire greatness and rejoice in beauty."
In "The Loyalties of Robinson Jeffers",the first in-depth study of Jeffers not written by one of his circle, poet and critic J. Radcliffe Squires addresses the question of a reconciliation of the beauty of the world and potential beauty in mankind: “Jeffers has asked us to look squarely at the universe.
He has told us that materialism has its message, its relevance, and its solace.
These are different from the message, relevance, and solace of humanism.
Humanism teaches us best why we suffer, but materialism teaches us how to suffer.”
========,2,Influence.
His poems have been translated into many languages and published all over the world.
Outside of the United States he is most popular in Japan and the Czech Republic.
William Everson, Edward Abbey, Robert McDowell, Gary Snyder, and Mark Jarman are just a few recent authors who have been influenced by Jeffers.
Charles Bukowski remarked that Jeffers was his favorite poet.
Polish poet Czesław Miłosz also took an interest in Jeffers' poetry and worked as a translator for several volumes of his poems.
Jeffers also exchanged some letters with his Czech translator and popularizer, the poet Kamil Bednář.
Writer Paul Mooney (1904–1939), son of American Indian authority James Mooney (1861–1921) and collaborator of travel writer Richard Halliburton (1900–1939), "was known always to carry with him (a volume of Jeffers) as a chewer might carry a pouch of tobacco ... and, like Jeffers," writes Gerry Max in "Horizon Chasers", "worshipped nature ... (taking) refuge (from the encroachments of civilization) in a sort of chthonian mysticism rife with Greek dramatic elements ..."
Jeffers was an inspiration and friend to western U.S. photographers of the early twentieth century, including Ansel Adams, Edward Weston, and Morley Baer.
In fact, the elegant book of Baer's photographs juxtaposed with Jeffers' poetry, combines the creative talents of those two residents of the Big Sur coast.
Although Jeffers has largely been marginalized in the mainstream academic community over the last thirty years, several important contemporary literary critics, including Albert Gelpi of Stanford University, and poet, critic and NEA chairman Dana Gioia, have consistently cited Jeffers as a formidable presence in modern literature.
His poem "The Beaks of Eagles" was made into a song by The Beach Boys on their album "Holland" (1973).
Two lines from Jeffers' poem "We Are Those People" are quoted toward the end of the 2008 film "Visioneers".
Several lines from Jeffers' poem "Wise Men in Their Bad Hours" ("Death's a fierce meadowlark: but to die having made / Something more equal to the centuries / Than muscle and bone, is mostly to shed weakness.")
appear in Christopher McCandless' diary.
Robinson Jeffers is mentioned in the 2004 film "I Heart Huckabees" by the character Albert Markovski played by Jason Schwartzman, when defending Jeffers as a nature writer against another character's claim that environmentalism is socialism.
Markovski says, "Henry David Thoreau, Robinson Jeffers, the National Geographic Society...all socialists?"
A passage from Jeffers' poem "Ghost" was read in the Ghost Adventures episode "Tor House", where the Ghost Adventures crew investigated Jeffers' house to see if Jeffers' spirit would appear 50 years later after his death, as was said in his poem.
In "A Secular Age", a critique of Western secularization, philosopher Charles Taylor presents Jeffers as an important literary example of "immanent anti-humanism" alongside figures such as Friedrich Nietzsche and Cormac McCarthy.
Invoking (often at length) the poems "At the Birth of an Age," "Invasion," "Rock and Hawk," "Tamar," and "The Women at Point Sur," Taylor sees Jeffers as encouraging human beings to embrace the beautiful cruelty of an indifferent universe.
========,2,Further reading and research.
The largest collections of Jeffers' manuscripts and materials are in the Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center at the University of Texas at Austin and in the libraries at Occidental College, the University of California, and Yale University.
A collection of his letters has been published as "The Selected Letters of Robinson Jeffers, 1887–1962" (1968).
Other books of criticism and poetry by Jeffers are: "Poetry, Gongorism and a Thousand Years" (1949), "Themes in My Poems" (1956), "Robinson Jeffers: Selected Poems" (1965), "The Alpine Christ and Other Poems" (1974), "What Odd Expedients" and Other Poems" (1981), and "Rock and Hawk: A Selection of Shorter Poems by Robinson Jeffers" (1987).
Stanford University Press recently released a five-volume collection of the complete works of Robinson Jeffers.
In an article titled, "A Black Sheep Joins the Fold", written upon the release of the collection in 2001, "Stanford Magazine" commented that it was remarkable that, due to a number of circumstances, "there was never an authoritative, scholarly edition of California’s premier bard" until the complete works published by Stanford.
Biographical studies include George Sterling, "Robinson Jeffers: The Man and the Artist" (1926); Louis Adamic, "Robinson Jeffers" (1929); Melba Bennett, "Robinson Jeffers and the Sea" (1936) and "The Stone Mason of Tor House" (1966); Radcliffe Squires, "The Loyalties of Robinson Jeffers" (1956); Edith Greenan, "Of Una Jeffers" (1939); Mabel Dodge Luhan, "Una and Robin" (1976; written in 1933); Ward Ritchie, "Jeffers: Some Recollections of Robinson Jeffers" (1977); and James Karman, "Robinson Jeffers: Poet of California" (1987).
Books about Jeffers's career include L. C. Powell, "Robinson Jeffers: The Man and His Work" (1940; repr.
1973); William Everson, "Robinson Jeffers: Fragments of an Older Fury" (1968); Arthur B. Coffin, Robinson "Jeffers: Poet of Inhumanism" (1971); Bill Hotchkiss, "Jeffers: The Sivaistic Vision" (1975); James Karman, ed., "Critical Essays on Robinson Jeffers" (1990); Alex Vardamis "The Critical Reputation of Robinson Jeffers" (1972); and Robert Zaller, ed., "Centennial Essays for Robinson Jeffers" (1991).
"The Robinson Jeffers Newsletter", ed.
Robert Brophy, is a valuable scholarly resource.
In a rare recording, Jeffers can be heard reading his "The Day Is A Poem" (September 19, 1939) on "Poetry Speaks – Hear Great Poets Read Their Work from Tennyson to Plath", Narrated by Charles Osgood (Sourcebooks, Inc., c2001), Disc 1, #41; including text, with Robert Hass on Robinson Jeffers, pp.
88–95.
Jeffers was also on the cover of "Time – The Weekly Magazine", April 4, 1932 (pictured on p. 90.
"Poetry Speaks").
"Jeffers Studies", a journal of research on the poetry of Robinson Jeffers and related topics, is published semi-annually by the Robinson Jeffers Association.
