========,1,preface.
Primož Trubar or Primož Truber () (1508 – 28 June 1586) was a Slovenian Protestant Reformer of the Lutheran tradition, mostly known as the author of the first Slovene language printed book, the founder and the first superintendent of the Protestant Church of the Duchy of Carniola, and for consolidating the Slovene language.
Trubar introduced Lutheranism in Slovenia, but after the Austrian Habsburgs introduced the Counter-Reformation only a small community remained in the Prekmurje region.
Trubar is the key figure of Slovenian cultural history and in many aspects a major historical personality.
========,2,Life and work.
Trubar was born in the village of Rašica (now in the Municipality of Velike Lašče) in the Duchy of Carniola, then under the Habsburgs.
In the years 1520–1521 he attended school in Rijeka, in 1522–1524 he continued his education in Salzburg.
From there he went to Trieste under the tutorship of the Roman Catholic bishop Pietro Bonomo, where he got in touch with the Humanist writers, in particular Erasmus of Rotterdam.
In 1527 the bishop Pietro Bonomo assigned Trubar a priest position in Loka pri Zidanem Mostu.
In 1528 he enrolled at the University of Vienna, but did not complete his studies.
In 1530 he returned to the Slovene Lands and became a preacher.
He gradually leaned towards Protestantism and was expelled from Ljubljana in 1547.
In 1550, while a Protestant preacher in Rothenburg, he wrote the first two books in Slovene, "Catechismus" and "Abecedarium", which were then printed that year in Schwäbisch Hall by Peter Frentz.
"Catechismus" also contained the first Slovene musical manuscript in print.
Altogether, Trubar authored 22 books in Slovene and two books in German.
He was the first to translate parts of the Bible to Slovene.
After the exhortation by Pier Paolo Vergerio, he translated the Gospel of Matthew in 1555 and until 1577 in three parts published the translation of the entire New Testament.
In period between 1561 and 1565 Trubar was the manager and supervisor of the South Slavic Bible Institute.
Trubar died in Derendingen, Holy Roman Empire (now part of the city of Tübingen, Germany), where he is also buried.
========,2,Commemoration.
In 1986, the Slovenian television produced a TV series, directed by Andrej Strojan with the screenplay written by Drago Jančar, in which Trubar was played by the Slovenian actor Polde Bibič.
Trubar was commemorated on the 10 tolar banknote in 1992, and on the Slovenian 1 euro coin in 2007.
In 2008, the Government of Slovenia proclaimed the Year of Primož Trubar and the 500th anniversary of Trubar's birth was celebrated throughout the country.
A commemorative €2 coin and a postage stamp were issued.
An exhibition dedicated to the life and work of Primož Trubar, and the achievements of the Slovenian Reformation Movement was on display at the National Museum of Slovenia from 6 March to 31 December 2008.
In 2009, the Trubar Forum Association printed Trubar's Catechism and Abecedarium in modern Slovene, in a scholarly edition that includes both the Trubar-era Slovene and the modern Slovene translation with scholarly notes.
The "Sermon on Faith", a portion of the Catechism, is available in modern Slovene, English, German and Esperanto.
Since 2010, 8 June is commemorated in Slovenia as Primož Trubar Day.
Google celebrated his 505th birthday anniversary with a dedicated Google Doodle.
