========,1,preface.
Eutelsat S.A. is a French-based satellite provider.
Providing coverage over the entire European continent, as well as the Middle East, Africa, India and significant parts of Asia and the Americas, it is one of the world's three leading satellite operators in terms of revenues.
Eutelsat's satellites are used for broadcasting 6,000 television stations, of which 600 are in HD, and 1,100 radio stations to over 274 million cable and satellite homes.
They also serve requirements for TV contribution services, corporate networks, mobile communications, Internet backbone connectivity and broadband access for terrestrial, maritime and in-flight applications.
Eutelsat is headquartered in Paris.
Eutelsat Communications Chief Executive Officer is currently Rodolphe Belmer.
Its main craft have traditionally operated from four positions, each separated by three degrees at Geostationary orbit; 7, 10, 13 and 16°E; although more positions are now operated.
In December 2015, the company announced a partnership with Facebook to launch an internet satellite over Africa by 2016 where Facebook lease all of a satellite's high-throughput Ka-band capacity, however the satellite was destroyed.
In December 2016, Eutelsat made a four-year agreement to lease AsiaSat 8's Ku-band.
========,2,History.
The European Telecommunications Satellite Organization (Eutelsat) was originally set up in 1977 as an intergovernmental organisation (IGO) to develop and operate a satellite-based telecommunications infrastructure for Europe.
In 1982 Eutelsat decided to start operations of its first TV-channel (Sky Channel or Sky 1) on the Orbital Test Satellite (OTS) in cooperation with ESA (The European Space Agency).
This was the first satellite based direct-to-home TV-channel launched in Europe.
In 1983 Eutelsat launched its first satellite to be used for telecommunications and TV distribution Initially established to address satellite telecommunications demand in Western Europe, Eutelsat rapidly developed its infrastructure to expand coverage to additional services (i.e.
TV) and markets, such as Central and Eastern Europe in 1989, and the Middle East, the African continent, and large parts of Asia and the Americas from the 1990s.
Eutelsat was the first satellite operator in Europe to broadcast television channels direct-to-home.
It developed its premium neighbourhood of five Hot Bird satellites in the mid-1990s to offer capacity that would be able to attract hundreds of channels to the same orbital location, appealing to widespread audiences for consumer satellite TV.
With the general liberalisation of the telecommunications sector in Europe, the IGO’s operations and activities were transferred to a private company called Eutelsat S.A. in July 2001.
In April 2005, the principal shareholders of Eutelsat S.A. grouped their investment in a new entity (Eutelsat Communications), which is now the holding company of the Group owning 95.2% of Eutelsat S.A. on October 6, 2005.
Currently it owns 96.0% of Eutelsat S.A.
On July 31, 2013, Eutelsat Communications announced the 100% acquisition of Satélites Mexicanos, S.A. de C.V. (“Satmex”) for $831 million in cash plus assumption of $311 million in Satmex debt, pending government and regulatory approvals.
The transaction was finalized on January 2, 2014.
Based in Mexico, Satmex operates three satellites at contiguous positions, 113° West (Satmex 6), 114.9° West (Satmex 5) and 116.8° West (Satmex 8) that cover 90% of the population of the Americas.
========,2,Satellites.
Eutelsat commercializes capacity on 40 satellites located in geosynchronous orbit between 116 degrees West and 172 degrees East.
On 1 March 2012, Eutelsat changed the names of its satellites.
The group's satellites mostly take the Eutelsat name, with the relevant figure for their orbital position and a letter indicating their order of arrival at that position.
On 21 May 2014, Eutelsat Americas (formerly Satmex) aligned its satellite names with the Eutelsat brand.
