========,1,preface.
Saigon Broadcasting Television Network, abbreviated SBTN, is the first 24-hour Vietnamese language channel geared towards the Vietnamese diaspora.
The network is specifically programmed to meet the needs of Vietnamese audiences living outside of Vietnam.
The channel provides television programs in the field of Vietnamese history, news, culture, economics, talk shows, children's shows, sitcoms, games shows; Production of radio and television programs primarily.
The channel strives to serve as a lifeline for the 1st, 1.5 & 2nd generation with extensive news both US and Vietnamese related, as well as covering educational programming and daily entertainment for the whole family, such as talk shows, dramas, Asian movies and documentaries; it also aims to help preserve Vietnamese culture for Vietnamese populations living abroad.
The headquarters are based in Garden Grove, California.
SBTN has local affiliates in Boston, Massachusetts (Boston Vietnamese Media), Washington, D.C. (SBTN-DC), Dallas, Texas (SBTN DFW), and Honolulu, Hawaii.
A Canadian version, SBTN Canada, is available in Canada for Vietnamese Canadians, with programming from the United States service, plus content produced in Canada; this service is owned by the Ethnic Channels Group, under license from SBTN.
========,2,History.
The network was established in 2001 ) in Orange County, California by Truc Ho, founder and CEO of SBTN who is also a well known songwriter/composer, producer and human rights activist in the Vietnamese community.
"It was my intention to help the Vietnamese community unite and form one voice to speak out on issues related to the community.
Together with a few other dedicated partners we raised the funds to launch the channel more than ten years ago."
========,2,About.
SBTN attracts viewers from all segments of the Vietnamese society from first generation to younger audiences and offers a broad range of originally-produced and acquired programming in the Vietnamese language including informative and educational shows such as news, documentaries, variety shows, music, talk shows, exclusive dramas, Hollywood Red Carpet events and much more.
The channel aims to deliver high-quality news and entertainment programming to the American-Vietnamese Community in their own language all around the world.
Broadcast on major cable and satellite providers, SBTN connects the community with their heritage, culture and identity.
The network is headquartered in Garden Grove, California, which is home of the largest Vietnamese population living outside Vietnam.
The majority of SBTN’s news, variety and music programming is produced in the Garden Grove facility.
SBTN is distributed by International Media Distribution, a leading provider of in-language and multi-ethnic programming in the United States and launched the network on Time Warner Cable in 2014 
SBTN is also available throughout the United States, Canada, and Australia on DirecTV,
Cox Communications,
Verizon Fios, 
AT&T U-verse, and many other video service providers.
