========,1,preface.
The China Times () is a daily Chinese newspaper published in Taiwan.
It is one of the four largest newspapers in Taiwan, along with the "Liberty Times", "Apple Daily (Taiwan)", and "United Daily News".
The paper is also printed in San Gabriel, California.
China Television (CTV) and Chung T'ien Television (CtiTV) are both under the ownership of the Want Want China Times Group.
========,2,History.
The "China Times" was founded in February 1950 under the name "Credit News" (), and focused mainly on price indices.
The name changed on January 1, 1960 to "Credit Newspaper" (), a daily with comprehensive news coverage.
Color printing was introduced on March 29, 1968, the first newspaper in Asia to make the move.
On September 1, 1968, the name changed once again to "China Times", presently based in the Wanhua District, Taipei.
The founder, Yu Jizhong (), died in 2002, leaving the presidency of the paper to his second son, Yu Jianxin ().
Yu Jizhong's eldest daughter, Yu Fanying, is the vice president.
The bureau chief is Lin Shengfen (), the general manager Huang Zhaosong (), and the chief editor Huang Qinglong ().
In 2008, the China Times Group was sold to the Want Want Holdings Limited, the largest rice cake manufacturer in Taiwan.
The China Times Publishing Company was the first publishing company in Taiwan to publicly issue shares.
"China Times" once managed a Taiwan-based baseball team, the China Times Eagles, but a betting scandal dissolved the team seven years into its operation.
The China Times Group has set up several charity organizations (Chinatimes Foundation and China Times Cultural Foundation).
========,2,Political position.
Since China Times was bought by the pro-China Taiwanese businessman tycoon Tsai Eng-Meng, head of (Want Want Holdings Limited) in 2008, the "China Times" has veered into a more pro-China stance, and has been criticized of being "very biased" in favor of positive news about China.
Before Tsai Eng-Meng bought it, The political position of the "China Times" had been slanted towards the pan-blue coalition (pro-unification), although it was considered more moderate than the "United Daily News".
Relations with the Kuomintang nationalist government have in the past been close, but when the "China Times U.S.
Edition" ceased publication after the Chiang Nan Murder Case in October 1984, the "China Times" broke with then KMT president Chiang Ching-kuo in protest.
Since the 1980s, the "China Times" has developed a more liberal and pro-democratic stance, often concerned with progressive issues such as social justice or environmental concerns.
During the 1990s, the "China Times" was often supportive of the opposition Democratic Progressive Party, more on the grounds of liberalism rather than Taiwanese Independence.
China Television (CTV) used to be owned by the Kuomintang and was sold to the China Times group in 2006.
